International and local investors have been justifiably unsettled by recent comments about possible mandate changes for the South African Reserve Bank. Challenges to the Bank’s independence, and calls to nationalise the institution, aren’t  new.  Its constitutional mandate was last challenged in 2017 by  public protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane, and the courts did not uphold that challenge. Recent comments, however, are causing fresh concern. The  Bank has been one of the few institutions in SA that can be regarded as being highly reputable. Reserve Bank governor Lesetja Kganyago has previously been named the world’s  central banking governor of the year. And both the  president and the finance minister  have reassuringly indicated that the independence of the  Bank is not  under threat. After all, central bank independence is often viewed as necessary to prevent political meddling. While meddling is normally motivated by short-term gains, such actions typically have serious and undesirable  long-term consequences, including raising question marks  about the attractiveness of a country as an investment destination. Both the  president and the finance minister therefore seem to appreciate that trust and confidence are essential for the  Bank to do its work effectively. Still, it’s worth interrogating the two issues raised by the  Bank’s detractors — namely  nationalisation of the central bank and changes to its  mandate to better meet the needs of the economy, including a focus on job creation. First, it has already been pointed out the  Bank is governed by the  constitution, and that ownership changes won’t  affect its approach to monetary policy. Most economic commentators agree that a tiny number of shareholders will unreasonably benefit from nationalisation at the cost of ordinary taxpayers and  that’s why this should not be pursued. On the second point: SA unemployment is widely understood to be a complex and structural issue, and the governor himself agrees with this view. Given the structural unemployment underpin, monetary policy lacks the supporting policy tools to effectively deal with unemployment. Unfortunately, the official reassurances about the Bank’s independence, from the  president and the finance minister, have done little to calm nerves, because comments about mandate changes are alarming  to  international  as well as local investors —  not least because these are surfacing  primarily via unsupported comments in the public domain. A central bank’s credibility is hard won over time through its actions. To effectively govern monetary policy, the bank’s consistency, willingness to follow through on stated policy intentions, and a track record of achieving targeted outcomes, are key. There are multiple ways to undermine central bank credibility while paying lip service to independence. Certainly, holding the  Bank accountable, via changes to its mandate, for an issue like unemployment over which it has little control, is one such way. Accountability is not an issue which the  Bank can sidestep while still maintaining credibility. And that is why the public comments being bandied about, without in-depth motivation and rigorous research, are such a source of concern. Globally, the tide has swung overwhelmingly in favour of central bank independence. There are roughly 200 central banks across the globe. Former Bank of England (BOE) chief economist Andy Haldane estimated in 2020 that the number of central banks with operational independence for policy setting had risen to between  80% and 90%. The world has recognised, and several empirical studies have shown, that independent central banks provide better inflationary outcomes without compromising economic growth. It’s worth remembering that central banking is less about ideology and more about what is economically feasible over the longer term. In the past, even Russian President Vladimir Putin supported his central bank’s independence in light of challenges from the siloviki (local hardmen). But arguably independence by itself is not enough. The stabilising role of a strong, respected, effective and therefore credible central bank on a country should not be ignored either. Recently, the  then UK  prime minister and her chancellor launched into a mini budget unsupported by the important rigour any policy process demands. Prior to the budget a number of members in their party actively questioned the institutions that  support them, including the BOE. The international markets didn’t take kindly to this approach with reaction being swift, painful and ultimately detrimental to ordinary taxpayers. After this political calamity, the BOE had to save the day by dealing with the economic fallout. The experience clearly illustrates why a credible central bank is relevant. It would be extremely unwise to undermine the credibility of  the South African Reserve Bank with a questionable mandate change. Ordinary South Africans need the  Bank’s steady hand now more than ever — especially given the perilous state of the South African economy. * Gouws is CEO of JSE-listed PSG Konsult. He writes in his personal capacity