It has become common, each year,  to comment on the national senior certificate results. In respect of the 2022 results, some  commentators have implied that the improved pass rate may have been manipulated in Umalusi’s standardisation process. This is a concern,  because such claims are made without evidence, and speculation is made to appear as fact. The  implication is that Umalusi implements decisions that are made elsewhere. This is patently false. Umalusi’s  role  in national exams is limited to external moderation of question papers and mark standardisation. After the papers are set and internally moderated by assessment bodies, Umalusi performs external moderation. The same happens with school-based assessment (SBA) tasks. After  the marking and capturing processes by assessment bodies, the marks  are submitted to Umalusi. The marks presented for standardisation constitute up to 75% of pupils’ final marks; the  remaining  portion comes from the SBA. Result standardisation  is assigned to the assessment standards committee  (ASC). Its  members aren’t employees of Umalusi; they are  some of the finest minds in our country, associated with various universities. In standardising exam results, the ASC relies on established principles and approaches. These  are applied consistently from one year to the next, irrespective of changes in pupil  numbers. The only pupils whose marks are excluded from the process  are those who have been  implicated in irregularities. So  no  argument can be made that Umalusi deviated from its standardisation process  in 2022 to accommodate increased pupil  numbers. The body performs its quality assurance duties free from  external interference. As to  the overall pass rate, it isn’t possible for Umalusi to gauge this when  subjects are individually standardised as the process is not iterative. It is also  not within  Umalusi’s mandate to concern itself with whether the overall results improve or drop; it simply ensures  marks are standardised in accordance with its principles. It  cannot foresee an increase or decrease in overall pass rates, or in pass categories, in a particular year. Standardisation is a quality assurance process  based on statistical and analytical principles. It aims to  mitigate the impact of factors other than pupils’ subject knowledge, abilities and aptitude. The ASC spends a considerable amount of time analysing various  reports, looking  for evidence on which to base  its decision per subject. In 2022, raw marks were accepted in most subjects across all assessment bodies. Adjustments were made in some subjects — decisions that were  informed by the available  evidence. After standardisation of these external marks, pupils’ SBA marks are statistically moderated. This is another layer of quality assurance  before the standardised marks are released. Umalusi believes  the best interests of pupils  are served when the ASC relies on consistently applied and defensible  principles in adjusting marks. More importantly, employers, education institutions, parents and pupils  rely on this  to ascertain the  validity of the results, and to give them confidence in the certificate of educational achievement. Dr Mafu RakometsiUmalusi CEO The FM welcomes concise letters from readers. They can be sent to fmmail@fm.co.za